# cereal-brand-segmentation
Segmenting 77 U.S. cereal brands and determining a possible gap in the cereal market, based on the brands’ nutritional attributes and probable user shopping tendencies.

Four measures from the provided data set were excluded from the analysis: the type of cereal usage, since over 96% of the cereals were intended to be served cold; the vitamin content, since over 80% of the cereals were at a FDA recommendation level of 25; and both the weight in ounces and cups per serving, since neither can be considered an inherent nutritional feature of a cereal brand. Eight nutritional measures were used for this study, along with variables representing manufacturers, retailer shelf placement, and consumer ratings.

There were notable variations in the calories, sodium, and potassium in the cereals, so median values of every nutritional component for each manufacturer were taken. A few manufacturers were initially distinctive, and differentiated by their nutritional values. Nabisco had cereals highest in fiber and potassium, and lowest in fat, sugars, and sodium. It also had the highest average consumer ratings. Quaker Oats had cereals low in sodium and carbohydrates, while Ralston Purina had cereals highest in sodium and carbohydrates. And yet, both manufacturers had similar consumer ratings of just over 40, but were similarly distributed among all the brands observed. Kelloggs and General Mills accounted for the highest numbers of brands observed, and had cereals high in sodium and relatively lower in potassium and protein.

To concisely summarize the measures for further analysis, dimension reduction was performed on the nutritional variables only. All of these base variables were scaled to normalize their measurement levels. After a visual inspection of the correlation matrix and application of the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) test for sampling adequacy, the variables of sugars, fat, and calories were withheld from the reduction, as they decreased the sample correlation.

The remaining five variables (protein, fiber, carbohydrates, potassium, and sodium) had a correlation of 0.64, which was above mediocre. Next, examination of the scree plot and the eigenvalues of the factors suggested that construction of two components was most appropriate. After applying an orthogonal rotation to ensure a low correlation between the factors and to identify factor loadings, two components were created, with three and two nutritional variables each.

Based on the weighted average of the original variables for each component, two new variables were created to differentiate the cereal brands. The variable Blood Sugar Health was created using protein, fiber, and potassium, as these nutrients are known to be beneficial for maintaining healthy blood sugar levels. The variable Careful Consumption was created using carbohydrates and sodium, nutrients that need to be consumed in moderation to prevent adverse health effects. Retailer shelf placement was factored in to observe additional differences between the brands.
